---
layout: post
title: Escaping the console
---

What we learn in class is great, foundational knowledge. However, it
would take far too long to learn to write programs that do more than
just output something into the console if you were to wait until it is
taught in a course. Students should take the time to explore and apply
what they learn in class to side projects that more closely resemble
real-world software.

This is for students who are starting their venture into creating their
own personal projects that may need a little push in the right
direction. If you've ever looked at products or other's projects and
thought to yourself "How did they do that? If I were to do something
similar, where would I even start?" then you're not alone. I was the
same, in fact, I still am. The best way I can explain it is that you
need a good mental model of how things work to get good at creating
software, whatever that means to you. Starting out, your mental model
might be very fuzzy if not non-existent. As you gain exposure to various
knowledge from practice and learning, you'll gain a clearer picture of
how it works, and you'll be able to focus on more advanced topics as you
go.

## You don't really start from scratch

Say you are like me, interested in creating a website with more than
just HTML, CSS, and JavaScript. The reality is that you'll need a lot
more than just small little scripts/programs to get your website off the
ground. For example, a very basic thing you will need is a server, a
local one to use for development rather than hosting. Do you know how to
make a local server? I sure don't. Maybe we'll both figure it out in the
future. In the meantime, we'll use software that was already created to
quickly achieve our short-term goal of creating small side projects. As
time goes on, hopefully the long-term goal is to turn all that seems
like magic into abstractions.

Starting out you'll heavily rely on frameworks and libraries
specifically designed to tackle a problem. For example, I used the
Django web framework to create my first "full-stack website" (it didn't
do much other than CRUD operations). It's a batteries included
framework, meaning that it provides many solutions that you may use
during development, built right into the framework itself. For example,
it automatically creates an admin page for your website, has it's own
ORM software to query your database with Python rather than SQL, and so
on. You too will most likely rely on many frameworks, libraries, and
projects to build whatever it is that you are building.

However, it's important to keep in mind that you are most likely going
to start using these more like clutches rather than tools. I was proud
when I made my first website, but it was a trash pile that was extremely
finicky. In the end, if I were to modify anything in the code, the whole
thing would stop functioning. This is because I did not really know what
I was doing. I was just mashing things together that I got from the
documents, hoping it would work. Don't just get good at using a tool,
get good at understanding the underlying mechanisms that make it work.

Anyhow, get familiar with the package/dependency manager of your
language of choice and search to see if there are any popular frameworks or
libraries used in your field of interest. Install a few, read their
documentatioin, and get to coding.

## Tutorial Hell is real

It's hard to come up good ideas for projects. In all honesty, I don't
think most beginners will come up with any good ideas for their first
few side projects, that's fine.

I've seen suggestions online that say to just follow a tutorial of
something interesting and call it a day. This is ok if you're still
learning the language, framework, or library. The problem in following
tutorials, however, is that you only learn on a shallow level, and it
doesn't look that good on a resume, either. That said, not everything
you do has to be done towards crafting a great resume.

Following tutorials helps get a quick glance at what's possible and the
workflow of the tools you're working with. However, being hand-held and
guided through the process of building something stops you from
formulating a mental model of how the language or framework you are
using actually works. You're missing out on the entire decision making
process, as in, when you are faced with a problem "How do I achieve
XYZ?" You do not have to find a solution; it's already in the tutorial
for you. If you're just starting out, maybe pick up a tutorial-styled
book. I used "Django for beginners" by William Vincent. Afterwards, I
recommend refraining from leaning too much on tutorials, or you won't
exercise that problem-solving muscle of yours.

You should strive to create something using just what you know already,
and what you can gather from the documentation and searching
debugging-styled questions. In doing so, you will be -- either
explicitly or implicitly -- forming a mental model of how the tool you
are using works. You will then write code based on your mental model. If
it works, then your mental model is correct (or hasn't lead you to an
error yet). If it doesn't work, then your mental model is incorrect, and
you're left with the task of figuring out what's wrong. When you go
through the trials and tribulations of figuring out why, you're likely
(if you've been paying attention) to come out with a better
understanding of how whatever it is that you're using to work. That is,
a better mental model of your tool. This is not something that you gain
from following a predefined tutorial.

## When inspiration runs dry

So, we're at the main problem: we don't want to just follow a tutorial,
but we don't have original ideas for a side project; what to do? The
cliche, but valid, advice is to introspect and find out any problems
that you face and devise a solution for your problems and code it. I
found that most problems I can think of are hard problems, hence why
there isn't already a solution for it, and I don't have the skills yet
to code it.

What I've come to settle on is to simply challenge myself with each
project. We tend to know pretty well where the bounds of our skill are.
We can think of or see other's projects and know whether we would be
capable of making something similar. So, the main task is to find a
skill, behaviour, or technology that we aren't familiar with and
practice it.

As an example, you may start with typing up a simple static website
using HTML, CSS, and Javascript. Next, you may want to challenge
yourself with creating a more dynamic, yet still technically static
website. With a bit of searching, you'll find that using a templating
language is great for this. Next, you'll try to create a truly dynamic
website that uses server-side scripting. This will open doors to working
with sessions, cookies, polling, databases, APIs, etc. It doesn't matter
how big or small the project is, what's important is that you're
isolating something that you don't know how to do, then beginning to
learn how to do it.

## Avoid perfection, embrace iteration

The amount of time I've wasted on thinking of how to do something right
on the first try. Avoid that at all cost. Trust me, you'll gain nothing
from overthinking about what frameworks to use or what things to learn
first. As a student you're better off studying all aspects of computer
science and getting exposure to all fields in this is a test software
development. It's not a waste of time to try something and learn that
you hate it. better to know now than two years into your career.

If you think about it trying to get things right early on is a
[premature optimization](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=74RdET79q40).
Instead of getting started and learning the fundamentals you're spending
time worrying about insignificants things that won't matter in the
future, since you're still just a beginner. Consider this when you come
across sites online that suggest it's useless to use languages or
frameworks that are old or not popular anymore. Skills transfer, and
what you're doing now is gaining foundational knowledge that will serve
you wherever you may end up.

Time is the only currency we have no control over, and hard work is the
only currency we have full control over. Don't worry about the
acceration of your learning. Instead, just make sure that you invest
some energy into trying your best, because that's hard work.
