---
title: Introspection alleviates mindless learning
date: 2023-06-24
---

Let's begin with defining what mindless learning is. For this blog, I'll
say that it is learning for the sake of completion rather than acquiring
a new skill or perspective. The problem with focusing on finishing a
task, rather than actually learning from it, is that you are left with
nothing but the empty claim such as "I have completed this course,
degree, certificate, etc." What people often miss is that such claims
are heuristics to indicating that you hold a certain skills or knowledge
on a subject. The hope is that by going through a course or degree, you
have either implicitly or explicitly acquired the important bits from
them.

Every student has completed a course only to forget everything once the
final is submitted. This become an issue when it occurs for most things
that you do. People have become very good at completing tasks but not
good at retaining the value from them. This is why we often hear things
such as degrees have become useless. As Gary Vee said "Give me $80,000,
and I'll give you a great life experience." A degree in itself is
useless. You can easily coast through it without learning a single
thing. It's what you make of it that is important. The valuable thing
about universities is that they provide excellent environments for you
to grow both personally and intellectually. If you knew yourself well
enough to not need to be guided by an institution, then of course going
to a university would be a waste of time. However, you'd need a lot of
introspection to achieve that, which brings us to our topic.

## Discover how you think

Understanding how you think is understanding the environment and type of
knowledge that you need in order to learn effectively. If you're like
me, you'll need to adopt thought processes and pay attention to how more
experienced people use information to extrapolate onto new ideas. Others
may best learn by doing, seeing the process occur in front of them and
coming up with their own mental model based on what they observe and
refining it as they go.

The importance of knowing how _you_ think is that it will help you seek
the right resources and the right patterns throughout your learning. For
example, whenever I get something wrong in an assessment, I review what
thought process was going through my head that lead me to the wrong
answer and compare it the thought process of the instructor and how they
reached the correct answer. Along the way, I discover what heuristics I
rely on when problem-solving, when they actually serve me and when they
lead me astray.
